The giant sable antelope (Hippotragus niger variani), also known in Portuguese as the palanca negra gigante, is a large, rare subspecies of the sable antelope native and endemic to the central highlands of Angola, occurring specifically in two areas: Cangandala National Park (south of the city of Malanje) and Luando Natural Strict Reserve (between the Kwanza and Luando Rivers, south of Cangandala).

It was first described in 1916 by Frank Varian, a British engineer and naturalist, as a new subspecies of sable antelope distinguished by its size, horn structure and length, and unique facial markings. At the time, Varian worked on the construction of Angola’s Benguela Railway, which connected the inland mining areas with the Atlantic coast. His work in the remote highlands brought him into contact with some of the country’s unique wildlife, leading to his discovery of the giant sable, which he subsequently documented and brought to scientific attention. The giant sable was the last of the large antelopes to be discovered, with its discovery occurring after that of the Okapi.

There was a great degree of uncertainty regarding the number of animals that survived during the Angolan Civil War. In January 2004, a group from the Centro de Estudos e Investigação Científica of the Catholic University of Angola, led by Dr. Pedro Vaz Pinto, was able to obtain photographic evidence of one of the remaining herds from a series of trap cameras installed in the Cangandala National Park, south of Malanje.

The giant sable antelope is the national symbol of Angola, and is held in a great regard by its people. This was perhaps one of the reasons the animals survived the long civil war. In African mythology, just like other antelopes, they symbolize vivacity, velocity, beauty and visual sharpness.

The giant sable antelope is evaluated as critically endangered on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. As of 2021 they reportedly only have a population of 300, 100 of which are living in Cangandala National Park.